[docs] Add NeMo2 -> Megatron Bridge guide (#730)
NVIDIA-NeMo/Megatron-Bridge: docs/nemo2-migration-guide.md

    save_interval=1000,
    most_recent_k=3,        # Keeps 3 most recent checkpoints (not metric-based)
    save_optim=True,
    save_rng=True,
    
    # Loading/resumption configuration
    load="/path/to/checkpoints",  # Resume from this directory (if exists)
    load_optim=True,               # Load optimizer state
    exit_on_missing_checkpoint=False,  # Don't exit if no checkpoint found (was resume_ignore_no_checkpoint)
    
    # Format and performance options
    ckpt_format="torch_dist",
    async_save=True,
    fully_parallel_save=True,
    fully_parallel_load=True,
    dist_ckpt_strictness="assume_ok_unexpected",
)
```

**Key differences:**
- **Resume behavior**: Setting `load` enables automatic resume if checkpoint exists (no separate `AutoResume` needed)
- **Pretrained checkpoint**: Use `pretrained_checkpoint` to specify base model weights for fine-tuning (loaded before training starts)
- **Top-k**: NeMo 2.0's `save_top_k` monitors metrics; Megatron Bridge's `most_recent_k` keeps recent checkpoints
- **Configuration location**: All checkpoint settings unified in one config (not split across callback, logger, and strategy)

```{Important}

> All checkpoint paths (`save`, `load`, `pretrained_checkpoint`) must point to **Megatron-format checkpoints**. HuggingFace checkpoints cannot be used directly—convert them first using {py:meth}`bridge.models.conversion.auto_bridge.AutoBridge.import_ckpt`. See {doc}`bridge-guide` for conversion details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All checkpoint paths (`save`, `load`, `pretrained_checkpoint`) must point to **Megatron-format checkpoints**. Hugging Face checkpoints cannot be used directly—convert them first using {py:meth}`bridge.models.conversion.auto_bridge.AutoBridge.import_ckpt`. See {doc}`bridge-guide` for conversion details.
```

```

For comprehensive documentation on checkpoint formats, local checkpointing, fault tolerance, and advanced features, see {doc}`training/checkpointing`.

---

### Optimizer and LR Scheduler Migration

Optimization configuration moves from NeMo 2.0's `MegatronOptimizerModule` approach to Megatron Bridge's direct {py:class}`megatron.core.optimizer.OptimizerConfig` and {py:class}`bridge.training.config.SchedulerConfig`.

#### Before: NeMo 2.0
```python
# NeMo 2.0 optimizer configuration with MegatronOptimizerModule
from nemo.lightning.pytorch.optim import MegatronOptimizerModule
from nemo.collections.llm.recipes import distributed_fused_adam_with_cosine_annealing

# Option 1: Using recipe helper functions
optim_config = distributed_fused_adam_with_cosine_annealing(
    max_lr=3e-4,
    min_lr=3e-5,
    warmup_steps=2000,
)

# Option 2: Direct MegatronOptimizerModule
optim = MegatronOptimizerModule(
    config=OptimizerConfig(
        optimizer="adam",
        lr=3e-4,
        use_distributed_optimizer=True,
    ),
    lr_scheduler=CosineAnnealingScheduler(
        warmup_steps=2000,
        constant_steps=0,
        decay_steps=100000,
    )
)
```

> #### After: Megatron Bridge

Reviewer 2: np: consider "after" -> "now" or something similar

        save="/path/to/sft_checkpoints",
    ),
    optimizer=OptimizerConfig(optimizer="adam", lr=1e-5),
    mixed_precision="bf16_mixed",
)

finetune(config, forward_step_func=forward_step)
```

#### Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT)

Add a `peft` configuration to enable parameter-efficient training:

```python
from megatron.bridge.peft import LoRA

config = ConfigContainer(
    model=Llama3ModelProvider8B(),
    train=TrainingConfig(
        train_iters=1000,
        eval_interval=100,
        micro_batch_size=1,
        global_batch_size=128,
    ),
    dataset=FinetuningDatasetConfig(
        dataset_root="/path/to/instruction_data",
        seq_length=4096,
        do_validation=True,
    ),
    checkpoint=CheckpointConfig(
        pretrained_checkpoint="/path/to/megatron/checkpoint",
        save="/path/to/peft_checkpoints",
    ),
    peft=LoRA(
        target_modules=["linear_qkv", "linear_proj", "linear_fc1", "linear_fc2"],
        dim=32,
        alpha=16,
    ),
    optimizer=OptimizerConfig(optimizer="adam", lr=1e-4),
    mixed_precision="bf16_mixed",
)

finetune(config, forward_step_func=forward_step)
```

> **Converting HuggingFace checkpoints**: If you have a HuggingFace model, convert it to Megatron checkpoint format first:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Converting Hugging Face checkpoints**: If you have a Hugging Face model, convert it to Megatron checkpoint format first:
```

# NeMo 2.0 → Megatron Bridge Migration Guide

This guide helps you migrate from NeMo 2.0 training and recipes to Megatron Bridge. Megatron Bridge retains the Pythonic, code-first API that NeMo 2.0 developed while simplifying configuration into a single {py:class}`bridge.training.config.ConfigContainer` with typed sub-configs. Model parallelism and performance features from Megatron-Core remain first-class.

> ## Key Concepts

Reviewer 3: is this supposed to be an empty section, or are the next sections supposed to be subsections with increased heading level?

## What Stays the Same

- **Megatron-Core Foundation**: Megatron Bridge uses the same Megatron-Core engine under the hood.
- **Model Parallelism**: Same TP/PP/CP/EP concepts with identical distributed training semantics.
- **High-Performance Features**: Mixed Precision, communication overlap, and other performance features are supported natively.
- **Pythonic API Retained**: Megatron Bridge preserves NeMo 2.0's philosophy of "configuration as code."

> 

Reviewer 3: Could also be broken up into a few different pages, like existing nemo 1.0 -> nemo 2.0 guide.

> 

Reviewer 3: i think this content is fine as is though, maybe 'migrating checkpoint conversion' should be on a new page since it's more disconnected from training

### Before (NeMo 2.0)
```python
# NeMo 2.0 Python API
from nemo import lightning as nl
from nemo.collections import llm

# Basic trainer setup
trainer = nl.Trainer(
    max_steps=1000,
    val_check_interval=100,
    limit_val_batches=50,
    log_every_n_steps=10,
)

model = llm.LlamaModel(
    config=llm.LlamaConfig(
        seq_length=2048,
        num_layers=24,
        hidden_size=1024,
    )
)

# For fine-tuning
data = llm.FineTuningDataModule(
    dataset_root="/path/to/data", 
    seq_length=2048, 
    micro_batch_size=1, 
    global_batch_size=128
)

trainer.fit(model, data)
```

### After (Megatron Bridge)
```python
# Megatron Bridge configuration pattern
from megatron.bridge.training.config import (
    CheckpointConfig,
    ConfigContainer,
    GPTDatasetConfig,
    LoggerConfig,
    OptimizerConfig,
    SchedulerConfig,
    TrainingConfig,
)
from megatron.bridge.models import GPTModelProvider

def create_config():
    return ConfigContainer(
        # Model with parallelism built-in

>         model=GPTModelProvider(

Reviewer 3: Can we make this a bit more 1:1 with the nemo 2.0 snippet? if a user was using preset LlamaConfig they can use a LlamaProvider ?
Also we show parallelisms here, but no configuration of strategy in nemo 2.0 snippet?

Reviewer 3: same for optimizer settings

Reviewer 3: i see there is more detailed configuration migration later, but i still think in this basic example it should be clear what comes from where
